`grants` Developer Blog post for dbt Core 1.2 (#1795)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2022-07-26-configuring-grants.md

---

> title: "Configuring Grants"

Reviewer: Wonder if we can make this a little more engaging. A few options:

- "Configuring Grants natively in dbt Core v1.2 for fun and DRYness" or a little less fun but 
- "Permissioning strategies for your project: configuring grants natively in dbt Core v1.2"
- "Updating our permissioning guidelines: Native grant configuration in dbt Core v1.2"

Reviewer: Also idk why I went with the word Natively for all of these it may be that "Grants as Configs" is better descriptor so

"Writing grants as configs in dbt Core v1.2 for fun and DRYness" or a little less fun but
"Permissioning strategies for your project: grants as configs in dbt Core v1.2"
"Updating our permissioning guidelines: grants as configs in dbt Core v1.2"

> description: "End consumers (like users and BI tools) will need to be granted the privilege to read the tables and views dbt creates in your warehouse. In v1.2, we introduced a `grants` config that is easier to than hooks and uses syntax that is database agnostic."

Reviewer 2: 👍 love this tagline

Here's a couple ways you could approach it:
- Option A -- simple and familiar -- hooks to the rescue
- Option B -- too clever by half -- use the dbt graph to infer which schemas need "usage"

Both examples: [https://github.com/dbt-labs/internal-analytics/compare/jerco/refactor-grants](https://github.com/dbt-labs/internal-analytics/compare/jerco/refactor-grants)

#### Option A: simple and familiar

```yaml
on-run-end:
	# better as a macro
	- "{% for schema in schemas %}grant usage on schema {{ schema }} to reporter;{% endfor %}"
```

Upside: Short, sweet, to the point.

Downside: we need to repeat the same list of roles here that we specified in our `grants` config.

#### Option B: Too clever by half

Now that `grants` is a real config in dbt, available via dbt metadata, you can do all sorts of fun things with it. For instance, figure out which schemas have at least one object granting `select` to a role, and then grant `usage` on that schema to that role!

```sql
-- macros/operations/reporting_grants.sql
{% macro grant_usage_on_schemas_where_select() %}
    /*

>       TOTALLY UNTESTED!!!

Reviewer 2: Let's possibly remove this line 😅 

Could say: "Pseudo code only, for demonstration purposes"

      For every role that can access at least one object in a schema,
      grant 'usage' on that schema to the role.
      That way, users with the role can run metadata queries showing objects
      in that schema (a common need for BI tools)
    */
    {% set schema_grants = {} %}
    {% if execute %}
      {% for node in graph.nodes.values() %}
        {% set grants = node.config.get('grants') %}
        {% set select_roles = grants['select'] if grants else [] %}
        {% if select_roles %}
          {% set database_schema = node.database ~ "." ~ node.schema %}
          {% if database_schema in database_schemas %}
            {% do schema_grants[database_schema].add(select_roles) %}
          {% else %}
            {% do schema_grants.update({database_schema: set(select_roles)}) %}
          {% endif %}
        {% endif %}
      {% endfor %}
    {% endif %}
    {% set grant_list %}
      {% for schema in schema_grants %}
        {% for role in schema_grants[schema] %}
          grant usage on schema {{ schema }} to {{ role }};
        {% endfor %}
      {% endfor %}
    {% endset %}
    {{ return(grant_list) }}
{% endmacro %}
```

> This might be too clever -- but you get the idea!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is certainly too clever -- but you get the idea, and an illustration of what's possible!
```

```

### Advanced permissions (or other operations)

Want to restrict access to specific rows in a table for specific users? Or dynamically mask column values depending on who’s asking?

The approach varies by database: in Snowflake, you’ll still want a `post-hook` to apply a [row access policy](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/security-row-intro.html) or a column [masking policy](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/sql/create-masking-policy.html) to your table whereas in Databricks you'd use [dynamic view functions](https://docs.databricks.com/security/access-control/table-acls/object-privileges.html#dynamic-view-functions).

It’s good to have hooks and operations as a method to utilize cutting-edge database capabilities. Any cases that become a wide and clearly demonstrated need can be upgraded by being built into `dbt-core`.

## Appendix

### Caveats and trade-offs of the original guidance
`on-run-end` hooks:
> for the period of time between when a model runs, and the end of the run, no one will be able to query that model, instead they’ll get a “permission denied” error. This creates downtime in your BI tool.”

`manage grants` privilege:

> > It is worth noting that this privilege *is* a global privilege – now anyone using the `transformer` role can change grants on any object as though they are the owner of the object. Up to you if you’re comfortable with this! If not, you may want to use a combination of `post-hooks` and `on-run-end` hooks instead 🙂”

Reviewer 2: 👍 good call including this, without centering it too much

(TIL that the British spell this "centring")
